In late 2016 and early 2017, 21 American diplomats stationed in Cuba started to report serious and in some cases debilitating neurological symptoms with no ready explanation, including headaches, nausea and hearing loss, brought on, most of them said, by a piercing, high-pitched sound, as though they had been caught in “an invisible beam of energy.”

The episodes, the White House soon became convinced, were the result of “targeted attacks”: The Trump administration responded by expelling 15 Cuban diplomats from Washington and withdrawing most of its staff members from the embassy.

Five years later, more than 200 U.S. government officials in countries around the world have claimed affliction with what is now known as the “Havana syndrome.” Reports of an outbreak in Hanoi, Vietnam, delayed Vice President Kamala Harris’s visit in August by a few hours. In September, President Biden signed into law a bill to compensate victims.

The cause, however, remains shrouded in mystery, speculation and doubt: The leading theory among American intelligence officials reportedly ascribes the illness not just to “targeted attacks,” but to targeted attacks executed with secret microwave weapons wielded by agents of hostile foreign powers — Russia, in particular. If this sounds to you like something out of a James Bond movie, you’re not alone:


How plausible is the “directed energy weapon” hypothesis, and are there simpler, perhaps even stranger explanations for the phenomenon? Here’s what people are saying.

‘The immaculate concussion’
In 2018, the well-regarded Journal of the American Medical Association published a study of the 21 diplomats, led by Douglas H. Smith, the director of the Center for Brain Injury and Repair at the University of Pennsylvania. Smith and his team said they found signs of brain damage, but no signs of impact to the patients’ skulls — a trauma they referred to as an “immaculate concussion.”

“Everybody was relatively skeptical at first,” Smith said, “and everyone now agrees there’s something there.”

Government officials initially suggested that the “something” was caused by some sort of sonic weapon. But that theory has been more or less discredited: “I know of no acoustic effect that can cause concussion symptoms,” Dr. Jürgen Altmann, a physicist and expert on acoustics, told The Times. “Sound going through the air cannot shake your head.” Moreover, sounds in recordings of the supposed weapon were later identified by biologists as the song of an exceptionally loud species of cricket.

Read moreThe Sounds That Haunted U.S. Diplomats in Cuba? Lovelorn Crickets, Scientists Say
In December 2020, the National Academy of Sciences offered an alternative explanation that attributed the illness not to sound but to light, in the form of microwaves. Proponents of this theory point to what’s known as the Frey effect: In the early 1960s, Allan H. Frey, a neuroscientist, documented that microwaves could trick the brain into “hearing” sounds that do not actually exist — a discovery that led to an arms race of sorts between the Soviet Union and the United States to create microwave weapons.

“It’s plausible that at just the right wavelength, an electromagnetic beam could be projected over hundreds of yards to create the symptoms seen in Havana syndrome incidents,” Iain Boyd, a professor of aerospace engineering, wrote. “If this is the case, it’s likely that these beams are interfering with the electrical functions of the brain and central nervous system.”

[“‘Seized by some invisible hand’: What it feels like to have Havana Syndrome”]

The State Department stressed, however, that “each possible cause remains speculative.” No evidence of such a weapon has been found, and Cuba and Russia have denied that they were behind any such targeted attacks.

Debatable  Agree to disagree, or disagree better? Broaden your perspective with sharp arguments on the most pressing issues of the week. Get it sent to your inbox.
‘Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence’
Many scientists have argued that the microwave weapon theory is implausible. While the U.S. military has tested crowd-control devices that use powerful microwaves that can travel long distances, they are exceedingly large and work by heating people’s skin from the outside in; a microwave weapon capable of injuring the brain, even if it could be concealed, would presumably first fry the victim’s flesh.

“The idea that someone could beam huge amounts of microwave energy at people and not have it be obvious defies credibility,” Kenneth Foster, an emeritus professor of bioengineering at the University of Pennsylvania who has studied the Frey effect, told The Times. “You might as well say little green men from Mars were throwing darts of energy.”

Cheryl Rofer, a former chemist at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, has taken a similar view. “The evidence for microwave effects of the type categorized as Havana syndrome is exceedingly weak,” she wrote in Foreign Policy. “No proponent of the idea has outlined how the weapon would actually work. No evidence has been offered that such a weapon has been developed by any nation. Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence, and no evidence has been offered to support the existence of this mystery weapon.”

So what might have caused the “Havana syndrome” brain damage, if not sound or light? That turns out to be something of a trick question, Dan Hurley reported for The Times in 2019: Many neurologists and psychologists assert that the JAMA paper provided no convincing evidence of any brain damage at all.

The diagnosis was based on the diplomats’ symptoms and their performances on tests of balance, hearing, memory and eye movement. But most of those test results — almost none of which are strictly objective, critics say — were within the range of normal; the threshold for impairment had simply been set “inexplicably high.”

When Robert Baloh, an emeritus professor of neurology at the University of California, Los Angeles, was given the JAMA manuscript for peer review, he recommended rejection and described its claims as “more like science fiction than science.”

A second JAMA study from 2019 that employed neuroimaging technology found no evidence of injury, only “differences” between the brain scans of 40 embassy workers in Cuba and healthy controls. Even those differences, some brain scientists say, are not evidence of any abnormality and could be easily explained by random variation.

Many scientists say that the “Havana syndrome” is much more likely a mass psychogenic illness, a phenomenon in which people become sick because they think they have been exposed to a health threat. The exposure as imagined isn’t real, but the symptoms — and the suffering — very much are, the result of changes in brain chemistry and neural connections that can last for years.

“Such illnesses have occurred for centuries and continue to occur on a regular basis around the world,” said Baloh, who co-wrote a book on the topic. “For example, as telephones became widely available at the turn of the 20th century, numerous telephone operators became sick with concussion-like symptoms attributed to ‘acoustic shock.’”

Once called mass hysteria, mass psychogenic illnesses are now also called functional illnesses because they trouble the conventional medical dichotomy between the brain and the mind. “I wince when I hear the word ‘psychogenic,’” Jon Stone, a neurologist at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland, told Hurley. “It creates a false impression about what these disorders are. They’re like depression or migraine. They happen in that gray area where the mind and the brain intersect.”

Months after the first JAMA paper was published, Stone co-wrote a letter to the editor critiquing its dismissal of functional illness as a potential explanation. “In many functional neurological disorders, initial sensory discomfort together with anxiety and heightened attention trigger maladaptive processes that lead to persistent symptoms,” the letter stated. “Although diagnostic caution is warranted, functional neurological disorders are common genuine disorders that can affect anyone, including hardworking diplomatic staff.”

[“Evidence Mounts that Mass Suggestion Caused ‘Havana Syndrome’”]

The case for skepticism
Despite the lack of conclusive evidence that U.S. officials were victims of targeted attacks, much less of secret microwave weapons deployed by a foreign power, many intelligence officials and journalists seem increasingly convinced of the narrative. The latest big story on the “Havana syndrome,” published in the media outlet Puck News, led with the following admission from the author, the national security reporter Julia Ioffe: “I always suspected that these illnesses were the product of deliberate attacks and that the Russian government was behind them — it was exactly the kind of weird thing they’d be both into and capable of.”

Americans should be wary of how the “Havana syndrome” is being framed in this way as a warrant for retaliatory action, Natalie Shure argued in The New Republic.

In May, she noted, former acting Defense Secretary Christopher Miller referred to the “Havana syndrome” as an “act of war.”

More recently, the House Foreign Affairs Committee reportedly began marking up a bill calling for sanctions against whoever “directed or carried out the Havana syndrome attacks.”

This month, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida accused skeptics of the targeted microwave attack theory like Baloh of being “influence agents” paid by foreign powers.

Perhaps most shocking, in Shure’s view, an anonymous member of the intelligence community quoted in Ioffe’s story seemed to call for punishing the alleged culprits, alluding to intelligence of “medium confidence” that the alleged culprits were Russian.

“Of course, we also invaded Iraq with ‘medium confidence,’” Shure wrote. “If ‘Havana syndrome’ has mercifully yet to be used to agitate for war as concretely as the imaginary nukes of Iraq were, it’s clearly been seized on by a national security apparatus formidably expanded since 9/11 — and if more people don’t come to their senses, harm will surely result.”



Once upon a time in Havana, Cuba, a strange thing happened.

United States diplomats and CIA emissaries to the country began reporting the sudden onset of debilitating symptoms, ranging from headaches and hearing loss to vertigo and nausea. As The New York Times notes, the symptoms were “brought on, most of [the victims] said, by a piercing, high-pitched sound, as though they had been caught in ‘an invisible beam of energy’”.

The inexplicable phenomenon, which was first recorded in 2016, was dubbed “Havana Syndrome”, and was initially hyped as potentially being caused by some sort of Cuban sonic weapon.

Never mind the US State Department’s assessment that the high-pitched sound in question was most probably emitted by the Indies short-tailed cricket. A global superpower should never miss an opportunity to malign a tiny communist island for being a thorn in the side of the empire.

Five years later, Havana Syndrome is back in the spotlight – after spreading not just far beyond the confines of Cuba but also, it seems, the realm of plausible reality.

More than 200 US diplomatic, military, and intelligence personnel worldwide have now claimed affliction by the condition – from China to Austria and Colombia to Kyrgyzstan.

In August, a visit to Vietnam by US Vice President Kamala Harris was delayed slightly following concerns that Havana Syndrome had struck in Hanoi. And in September, the CIA evacuated an officer from Serbia who had – as Fox News put it – “suffered serious injuries consistent with those associated with Havana Syndrome, part of a rise of such attacks on US officials overseas”.

While the officially sanctioned terminology for suspected syndrome-related episodes is “anomalous health incidents”, belligerent language involving “attacks” and the like is becoming increasingly normalised in the US political-media establishment. This should be of concern to anyone who cares that the US tendency to engage in aggressive and destructive behaviour abroad based on lies and fabrications is, well, hardly an anomaly.

According to The Politico website, Havana Syndrome is almost certainly “the result of directed-energy attacks by a foreign government – likely Russia” – a narrative that is currently gaining traction among select media outlets as they direct their own energy into journalistic attacks that assist in the creation of facts on the ground regarding alleged microwave assaults by US nemeses.

The problem with this narrative, however, is that there is zero evidence to back it up. Fox News, even while admitting that “no evidence has so far emerged of Russian involvement”, nonetheless chooses to end its article on the Serbian incident with a suggestion from counterterrorism and foreign policy expert Jason Killmeyer that the US should go ahead and take action anyway because “we’re five years into this thing. There’s no ‘smoking gun’ coming.”

Meanwhile, CIA veteran Marc Polymeropoulos – who allegedly fell prey to Havana Syndrome during a 2017 mission in Moscow – contends that the whole business constitutes a “terror weapon” and an “act of war”.

Therefore, the thinking apparently goes, the US must retaliate – just like it retaliated against Iraq for, you know, having nothing to do with the attacks of September 11, 2001.

Fittingly for the fear-mongering crowd, CIA Director William Burns – himself a former Moscow-based diplomat – has appointed to oversee the agency’s war on Havana Syndrome none other than an undercover spy who spearheaded the hunt for Osama bin Laden.

And US President Joe Biden has dutifully signed into law the HAVANA Act, which stands for Helping American Victims Afflicted by Neurological Attacks.

But is Havana Syndrome itself all an act and nothing more?

In a recent op-ed, Robert Baloh – professor of neurology at the University of California, Los Angeles – writes that Havana Syndrome “looks to me like a textbook case of mass psychogenic illness”, otherwise known as “mass hysteria”.

The phenomenon began, he notes, with a single undercover – presumably stressed out – US agent in Cuba who “had real symptoms, but blamed them on something mysterious” and told his colleagues. In the end, “with the help of the media and medical community, the idea solidified and spread around the world” despite the lack of medical or other evidence.

A BBC News article furthermore points out that the US itself has long had an “interest in weaponising microwaves”, and that, as of the 1990s, the US Air Force presided over a project “to see if microwaves could create disturbing sounds in people’s heads” as well as one “to see if they could be used to kill people”.

Disturbing, indeed.

The BBC goes on to quote ex-CIA officer Polymeropoulos on how Havana Syndrome is now a “major distraction for us if we think that the Russians are doing things to our intelligence officers who are travelling”. This state of affairs, he says, will “put a crimp in our operational footprint”.

But would a “crimp” in the operational footprint of the CIA – not to mention the US military – be such a bad thing in the end? After all, both institutions possess a formidable track record of literally terrorising countless people across the world – from Cuba, Guatemala, and Nicaragua to Vietnam, Afghanistan, and Iraq – with methods far more damaging and lethal than, say, cricket noises and migraine induction.

Whatever happens with Havana Syndrome, then, it is safe to say the US has long excelled at exploiting mass domestic hysteria to wreak bellicose havoc internationally. It seems the time has perhaps come, then, to diagnose a syndrome with a different sort of geographic specificity.


By now you’ve likely heard of Havana syndrome, the frightening illness spreading among diplomats and spies across the globe. First documented in Cuba in 2016, the ailment, which is typically marked by sometimes-incapacitating headaches, dizziness, vertigo, and brain fog, has reportedly afflicted federal employees stationed on four continents, in locales ranging from Austria to Vietnam to a Trader Joe’s in Arlington, Virginia. It has led to probes conducted by both the Trump and Biden administrations, and a steady stream of thorough journalistic investigations. But five years after the first cases, the matter of what, exactly, is causing people to get sick remains unclear. The most popular theory among politicians and intelligence officials: Havana syndrome is the result of “directed energy weapons” developed and deployed by a hostile foreign actor (Russia is the leading candidate) that have somehow evaded all detection by U.S. investigators.

If you think this sounds too far-fetched a plot even for a B-movie thriller, you’ve got a point. Indeed, there has been little solid evidence presented to date that any individual has been attacked, much less by a yet-to-be-invented ray gun. Yet the leading countervailing theory — that Havana syndrome represents a mass sociogenic illness (a phenomenon sometimes previously known as “mass hysteria,” an outdated term with misogynistic undertones) — remains a controversial one. Though the idea has gained increasing traction among mainstream media outlets in recent weeks (after kicking around at the edge of the debate for years), it is still often cast as ridiculous or offensive. In large part, this is due to the occupation of the affected individuals. As one Hill staffer told Puck News reporter Julia Ioffe, “Why would we question the sanity of people who are highly trained to handle some of the government’s most sensitive information and negotiations?”

Yet this type of thinking stigmatizes mental illness while reflecting exactly what the national-security community, and much of the reporting that has parroted its point of view, has gotten wrong about Havana syndrome. Trying to separate suffering of the “mind” and the “body” is a fool’s errand. Every symptom, after all, is “all in our heads.” And this goes for everyone: young or old, more or less educated, high-level diplomat or otherwise.

Sociogenic illnesses among various populations have been a constant for hundreds of years. A 2002 review by sociologist Robert E. Bartholomew and psychiatrist Simon Wessely traced episodes beginning in the 15th century, with outbreaks of bizarre motor behaviors among groups of nuns living under bleak and highly oppressive religious orders. Such epidemics were often attributed to demonic possession. As societal fears shifted, so did the “cause” of the cases. For instance, Bartholomew and Wessely note that the use of chemical gas in World War I led to outbreaks of shortness of breath and dizziness in numerous communities that were initially attributed to nonexistent noxious gases.  Importantly, they conclude that “there is no particular predisposition to mass sociogenic illness.” In other words, it is something that can afflict any of us under the right conditions.

And Havana syndrome fits into the historical pattern. The high-pressure setting in Havana in 2016-17 — with Donald Trump incoming and détente between Cuba and the U.S. on ice — provided ripe conditions for an outbreak. As news of a shadowy threat spread quickly among the tight-knit diplomatic community, and as media coverage depicted a foreign menace (and invisible weapon) behind the attacks, it’s plausible that a sociogenic illness went global. (Bartholomew, along with the neurologist Robert Baloh, have most prominently made this case, in articles and a 2020 book.)

This chain of events may conjure up images of Havana syndrome as a frenzied panic, whereas the reality is no doubt more complex — and quotidian. I cannot determine the cause of symptoms in any one individual. However, it seems likely that a multitude of factors could be at work in producing the manifestations of Havana syndrome (potentially including undiagnosed conditions for some), and that these may vary widely among individuals. It is the spreading conviction of attack by microwave that should be seen as socially contagious, not the underlying illness itself.

After all, as any physician would attest, the symptoms associated with Havana syndrome are debilitating but not uncommon: According to one comprehensive study in New Zealand, 89 percent of the general population suffers from one or more symptoms, and 23 percent from ten or more. This includes many people with the same sorts of constitutional and neurologic problems described by ill spies and diplomats: 35.5 percent with fatigue, 35.4 percent headache, 15.2 percent difficulty concentrating, 12.4 percent numbness or tingling, and 12.1 percent memory problems. Such symptoms are sometimes associated with specific medical diagnoses (say, dementia), but often they are not. They can also be driven or exacerbated by stressors, anxiety, and depression.

Moreover, every one of us is susceptible to “nocebo” effects — uncommon experiences we errantly associate with particular stimuli, but that are real nevertheless. For instance, in the placebo arm of the Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine trial, 47.4 percent suffered fatigue, 41.9 percent headache, and 11.0 percent new or worsening joint pain. Similarly, new research has found that the muscle pains commonly attributed to cholesterol-lowering statin medications are mostly, if not entirely, nocebo effects. Indeed, I suspect that such experiences are simply a part of being alive. Early in the pandemic, I developed a fear of contracting COVID-19 and infecting the patients and staff at the ICU where I work as a physician. With that anxiety emerged physical symptoms I’d vaguely define as sore throat and chest heaviness. After testing negative, I slowly came to realize that these were sensations I had always experienced from time to time, but which had become more intense due to this fear — and the focus it engendered. This kind of brain-body connection might explain Havana syndrome symptoms for some.

For others, Havana syndrome might be better characterized as a variety of a condition called Functional Neurological Disorder, or FND. in which people experience a disordered and enhanced feedback loop between their sensations, perceptions, and suffering. Symptoms can be numerous, severe, chronic, and debilitating, although many improve with physical rehabilitation, muscular retraining, and psychological support.

Are such symptoms “all in our heads?” Of course — just like every symptom.  A severed arm suffers nothing by itself. As human beings, all pain is computed and processed and generated in and by our brains — and this is equally true whether severe fatigue or brain fog stems from, say, a shattering wave of debilitating depression or occult pulmonary tuberculosis.  An understanding of this reality led to the development of the “biopsychosocial model” of medicine in the 1970s — the idea that, fundamentally, a complex interaction of internal and external factors conspire in the production of illness.  This is an idea too often forgotten today.

Indeed, commentators and even researchers have again and again demonstrated a confused and sometimes even offensive misunderstanding of how sickness works, describing Havana syndrome as “real” or “fake,” or of the “mind” or “body.” For instance, in a heavily influential investigation published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, University of Pennsylvania researchers argued against the sociogenic hypothesis on the grounds that patients were “largely determined to continue to work,” as if laziness was the culprit behind FND or nocebo-related suffering. Other commentators have similarly emphasized the occupation or security clearances of the patients, as if spies do not suffer the same spectrum of neuropsychiatric ailments as us mere mortals.

None of this is to argue that the etiology (or underlying cause) of illnesses do not matter: They do, both to direct proper treatment and to ensure that we do not, say, go to war with Russia based on a risible theory. But etiology can be elusive, and very often, a multitude of causes drive our symptoms and suffering. In any event, the proximate reason for someone’s pain should never serve as a reason to deny empathetic and thorough evaluation, treatment, and social support. Havana syndrome may have nothing to do with a sonic death ray, but it is quite real. And for the people experiencing it, that’s all that matters.


The story of Havana syndrome has acquired mythical qualities in its telling. In late 2016 and early 2017, members of the American embassy in Havana, Cuba, started to report debilitating symptoms and strange occurrences. An incapacitating sound, often coming from a single direction, was heard by some but not others, waking them up in the middle of the night. A sensation of intense pressure was felt in the ear. Vertigo and nausea were some of the early symptoms. Then came the difficulty concentrating, the memory problems, the sleep disturbances in some of the victims. Members of the Canadian embassy were eventually also struck by what was being called an “attack.” Secret sonic weapons and microwave beams were suspected and the story quickly morphed into a devilish espionage novel, with accusations levelled at Cuba, Russia, even China.

Like in a James Bond movie, one country was not enough: soon, similar symptoms began to be reported in Australia, China, Austria, even a suburb of Washington, D.C., and the park south of the White House. U.S. vice-president Kamala Harris’ trip to Vietnam was delayed earlier this year because of an “anomalous health incident” reported there that was strikingly similar to Havana syndrome. A superficial reading of nearly five years of media coverage of these globe-trotting incidents would have you believe an undetected secret weapon has been deployed all over the world and nobody quite knows what it is.

There are many layers to peel back when it comes to the reporting done on Havana syndrome and our first stop should be the name. Naming diseases and syndromes after places, whether in earnest or as a back-handed jibe, poisons the geographic well in people’s minds. The “Wuhan flu,” the “Indian variant of the coronavirus,” even the “Spanish flu” (which had nothing to do with Spain), these names can feed discrimination by demonizing a place and its peoples. But with Havana, unfortunately, I’m not aware of any geographically neutral name. Reports speak of “symptom clusters,” of “unexplained events,” of “anomalous health incidents,” none of which constitute unique nomenclature. So “Havana syndrome” it is for now.

When this ailment resisted easy answers, more and more eccentric explanations began to be considered. Some of them border on science fiction.

The man with the sonic gun
When the spectre of spies is raised, poisons come to mind. Could the diplomats affected by this Havana syndrome have had their food or water spiked or the air they breathe poisoned? Specifically, a study funded by the Canadian government zeroed in on neurotoxins from pesticides used in Cuba to combat the spread of Zika. The hiccup is that many of the people who lived with the victims and around them showed no symptoms. How could pesticides selectively affect dozens of American and Canadian diplomats but no Cubans, nor any non-diplomats working at those embassies? Or are we to believe that the widespread use of these pesticides did cause symptoms in many Cubans but that nobody has come forward, despite the Havana syndrome story making international news for years? Moreover, a report by the National Academies of Sciences states that the incident was not consistent with acute poisoning by the type of insecticide used in Havana, though it could not rule out chronic exposure as a contributing factor.

If poisons cannot give us solace in cracking this case, the alternatives move us from the quaint territory of Agatha Christie to the realm of speculative fiction. Because the perception of a sudden, loud sound and of pressure against the ear had been reported by many of the affected people, the idea of a covert sonic weapon was considered. Could this device emit infrasounds, meaning sound waves below the threshold of what we can hear (typically below 20 Hz)? Research into so-called sonic cannons has indeed been done, but it seems that their operators are as much at risk from their ill effects as the intended targets, and these effects are often more annoying than truly harmful. I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention the mythological “brown note,” a specific infrasound that is thought to trigger instant defecation. When the Mythbusters team was given license to test this claim using massive subwoofers specifically modified to play this note with enough vigour, the dreaded discharge did not take place. Even when projected at a deafening 128 decibels (in the range of a rock concert), the sound could not live up to its myth.

At the other end of the spectrum, above our hearing threshold of 20,000 Hz, we find another potential culprit: ultrasounds. Could the sound waves typically used to see a fetus during pregnancy be weaponized and cause, as has been suggested, damaging acoustic bubbles in the inner ear and brain? The problem is that ultrasounds need close contact to propagate well, hence the use of gel for pregnancy ultrasounds. Over long distances, sound gets weak. It can be easily blocked by walls. To focus a damaging beam of ultrasounds at someone inside a house, an attacker would likely need a gargantuan speaker with massive energy needs. That’s hard to square with the idea of a weapon that is both mobile and undetectable.

If the attack was unlikely to come from a sound wave, maybe it came from a light wave, specifically a microwave. Microwaves are lower in frequency than visible light and infrared, but above radio waves on the light spectrum. The U.S. military has conducted research into high-powered microwave weapons, but a 2012 feature article in the journal Nature summarized those fifty years of research as “wasted energy,” citing unreliability and the need for imposing pulse generators. When Cheryl Rofer debunked the microwave theory for Foreign Policy, she imagined a mobile microwave weapon outside a diplomat’s house and calculated that to power a simple microwave oven on the go, you would need a 2,200-watt gasoline-powered generator weighing around 50 pounds. To weaponize the beam, you might need another ten pounds or, alternatively, about 200 laptop computer batteries. Portability, if such a weapon even exists, becomes a real issue. Moreover, microwave weapons were often meant to attack equipment, not people, and no screwed-up electronics were reported in the vicinity of the victims of the Havana syndrome. Yet a strange phenomenon tied to microwaves has piqued the attention of investigators.

For your ears only
It’s called the Frey effect. In 1962, Allan H. Frey published a paper in which he described a situation in which microwaves, which are not sound waves, were heard by humans. His participants could hear these waves as coming from within or right behind their own head. The sound was described as being a buzz, clicking, hiss, or knocking. Ergo, Havana syndrome victims might have been zapped by a secret microwave weapon and the strange sound they heard was the buzzing noise of the Frey effect. But as Professor Kenneth Foster, who has studied the Frey effect, told The New York Times, “the sound would be so soft that near silence would be needed for a person to detect it.” With the hubbub of Cuba and the everyday noises of modern life, you’d have to crank up the power and end up frying the person’s skin in the process. The Frey effect as an explanation for Havana syndrome beggars belief. “You might as well say little green men from Mars were throwing darts of energy,” Foster concluded.

It may be hard to reconcile the improbability of a complex weapon or a simple poison with a State Department spokesperson declaring that “we have never seen this anyplace in the world before.” How could this syndrome be so new and unique and not have a new and unique cause? By appraising the papers published by the doctors who examined the people affected by Havana syndrome, some experts started to see differences between what had been claimed and what had been documented.

From crickets with love
Embassy staff and family members were seen by an ear, nose, and throat specialist at the University of Miami, who saw signs of an “immaculate concussion:” it looked like 16 people had signs of a concussion or a mild traumatic brain injury but without the actual head injury. These 16 individuals were then sent to a brain injury centre at the University of Pennsylvania, along with eight additional cases that subsequently came forward. The paper that reported on their findings, published in JAMA, speaks to “injury to widespread brain networks.” All of this sounds both alarming and mysterious.

When a medical sociologist and a neurologist looked into this, however, the case for an unsolvable puzzle started to weaken. The JAMA paper assumes exposure to an “unknown energy source,” which was never demonstrated. So much for evidence. The injury to brain networks was actually only seen in three individuals; most had normal findings. The white matter changes seen in those three are apparently common in conditions like depression, migraine, and even aging. The threshold the authors used to declare an impairment was, according to the editor of the journal Cortex, “unheard of in clinical practice or research,” leading to just about anybody qualifying as such. As for the University of Miami findings, there was little overlap in symptoms from one diplomat to another, and their asymptomatic housemates, who presumably had been exposed to the same agent, were bizarrely not tested as a control group. Reports had also emerged of some diplomats losing their hearing because of this incident, but it turned out that only two had experienced hearing impairment, which predated their deployment to Cuba.

And that mysterious sound thought to be the Frey effect? Some diplomats managed to record it from inside their house (proving that, at least in those instances, the sound existed outside of their head), and scientists identified the loud noise as the song of lovelorn Indies short-tailed crickets. These crickets are known to experts to make quite the racket: you can hear them, one of them told The New York Times, “from inside a diesel truck going 40 miles an hour on the highway.” No wonder diplomats were stirred from their sleep and shaken by the loudness of this foreign sound, especially given the inherent stress of the situation they were in. Because the state of affairs they found themselves in was no picnic.

U.S.-Cuba relations have danced on a hair-trigger for decades. Bizarre assassination schemes were plotted, attempted, and abandoned by American agents to push Cuban president Fidel Castro out of the picture. These plans would hardly be believed if we saw them used in a movie, and some may have been fictional, intentionally leaked to distract from real machinations. One involved a poisoned cigar to create LSD-like symptoms so that Castro would make a spectacle of himself during a public speech. Another bet on his love of scuba diving to lead him to an exploding seashell. Meanwhile, a truly outlandish plan involved submarines firing projectiles designed for illumination to serve as a portent—perhaps the Second Coming of Jesus Christ—for the fall of the Communist regime, feeding into Cubans’ religious beliefs.

The Cuban intelligence community was also busy. They were harassing American diplomats by disrupting their sleep and deflating their tires. They would enter the diplomats’ homes, rearrange furniture, leave cigarette butts in ashtrays, and dump feces and urine on the floor. Family pets were poisoned. The psychological and physical stress of working at the U.S. embassy in Cuba was highlighted by a former official who worked there: “Cuba is considered a high-threat, high-stress post,” he told ProPublica. Diplomats are briefed: “Assume they are always watching.” The anticipation of a threat is constant, and these diplomats are part of a tight community with an active rumour mill. The U.S. embassy in Cuba had reopened in July 2015 as part of Obama’s rapprochement with the country. When Havana syndrome first manifested itself, Castro had just died and Trump had been elected. The pressure cooker was ready to burst. If something strange were to happen to one U.S. diplomat in Cuba, it could easily lead to a cascade of similar events.

And that is where we arrive at a plausible though maddening explanation.

Horses, zebras, and giraffes
There is a saying in medicine that when you hear hoofbeats behind you, expect a horse, not a zebra. It’s routinely taught to remind medical students that exotic diagnoses are rare; common explanations for symptoms should be considered first. Yet the human brain has a tendency to latch onto zebras (or giraffes) when horses might do.

By 2016, 165 residents living in the vicinity of a zoo in Devonshire, England, had signed a petition accusing the giraffes’ enclosure at the zoo of making them sick. How? The year before, biologists had reported that giraffes occasionally communicate with each other via barely audible hums or low-frequency sound waves. An investigation at the zoo, however, revealed no source of noise. Even the giraffe keepers at the zoo said they had never heard those hums before. But neighbours were sure they could hear a hum and it was coming from the giraffe enclosure.

In 1761, Ben Franklin invented a musical instrument made up of spinning glass discs called a glass armonica. Over the ensuing years, the instrument went from being perceived as a cure-all to being accused of provoking fainting spells, convulsions, even madness. Since then, new technologies like incandescent light bulbs and the telephone have inspired dread in some people. Reading under a light bulb would lead to blindness, went the rumour, and the strain of the telephone would surely cause excitability and giddiness in phone operators.

When constant stress leads to an obsessive anticipation of danger, the pressure cooker has to explode at some point. Common occurrences in life, like a sudden spell of persistent dizziness, can make us seek an external explanation. Something out there is making us sick. The anxiety itself can manifest in a multitude of physical ways. Social contagion spreads the syndrome to the members of our community.

These psychogenic effects—of the brain’s anxiety onto the rest of the body—are believed by a scientific board that reported to the State Department to have played an important role in explaining the diplomats’ injuries, and a medical sociologist and a neurologist wrote an entire book (summarized in this Conversation article) on Havana syndrome that explains it as a mass psychogenic illness. To be abundantly clear, mass psychogenic illnesses are not psychiatric disorders. Affected individuals are not lying. They are healthy and sane, but a perceived trigger leads to illness.

Crickets, dizziness, constant suspicion, all examined by medical specialists falling prey to confirmation bias, leading to debilitating symptoms blamed on extravagant weaponry, and we end up with Havana syndrome. At least, that seems to be the most plausible theory right now. We will never know for sure what truly happened, since thorough baseline data on the affected individuals does not exist to check for changes, and since testimonies were often gathered much later after symptoms started, putting recollections at risk of recall bias.

We’ve blamed witches, demons, telephones, and giraffes for the aches and pains of everyday life. The Havana syndrome saga may yet be another episode of this blame game. I really feel for the people affected, especially since their personal health is being scrutinized and speculated about under the microscope of media coverage. But I don’t think we can rule out the snowball effect of nonspecific symptoms in a high-stress situation with an active rumour mill. These mass suggestion events have punctuated humanity’s long history. Microwave weapons? Not so much.


Doctors, scientists, intelligence agents and government officials have all been trying to find out what causes "Havana syndrome" - a mysterious illness that has struck American diplomats and spies. Some call it an act of war, others wonder if it is some new and secret form of surveillance - and some people believe it could even be all in the mind. So who or what is responsible?

It often started with a sound, one that people struggled to describe. "Buzzing", "grinding metal", "piercing squeals", was the best they could manage.  

One woman described a low hum and intense pressure in her skull; another felt a pulse of pain. Those who did not hear a sound, felt heat or pressure. But for those who heard the sound, covering their ears made no difference. Some of the people who experienced the syndrome were left with dizziness and fatigue for months. 

Havana syndrome first emerged in Cuba in 2016. The first cases were CIA officers, which meant they were kept secret. But, eventually, word got out and anxiety spread. Twenty-six personnel and family members would report a wide variety of symptoms. There were whispers that some colleagues thought sufferers were crazy and it was "all in the mind". 

Five years on, reports now number in the hundreds and, the BBC has been told, span every continent, leaving a real impact on the US's ability to operate overseas. 

Uncovering the truth has now become a top US national security priority - one that an official has described as the most difficult intelligence challenge they have ever faced.  


Short presentational grey line
Hard evidence has been elusive, making the syndrome a battleground for competing theories. Some see it as a psychological illness, others a secret weapon. But a growing trail of evidence has focused on microwaves as the most likely culprit.  

In 2015,  diplomatic relations between the US and Cuba  were restored after decades of hostility. But within two years, Havana syndrome almost shut the embassy down, as staff were withdrawn because of concerns for their welfare.

Initially, there was speculation that the Cuban government - or a hard-line faction opposed to improving relations - might be responsible,  having deployed some kind of sonic weapon. Cuba's security services,  after all,  had been nervous about an influx of US personnel and kept a tight grip on the capital.

That theory would fade as cases spread around the world. 

Short presentational grey line
But recently, another possibility  has come into the frame - one whose roots lay in the darker recesses of the Cold War, and a place where science, medicine, espionage and geopolitics collide.  

When James Lin, a professor at the University of Illinois, read the first reports about the mysterious sounds in Havana, he immediately suspected that microwaves were responsible. His belief was based not just on theoretical research, but first-hand experience. Decades earlier, he had heard the sounds himself. 

Since its emergence around World War Two, there had been reports of people being able to hear something when a nearby radar was switched on and began sending microwaves into the sky. This was even though there was no external noise. In 1961, a paper by Dr Allen Frey argued the sounds were caused by microwaves interacting with the nervous system, leading to the term the "Frey Effect". But the exact causes - and implications - remained unclear.


The Mystery of Havana Syndrome

line
In the 1970s, Prof Lin set to work conducting his experiments at the University of Washington.  He sat on a wooden chair in a small room lined with absorbent materials, an antenna aimed at the back of his head. In his hand he held a light switch. Outside, a colleague sent pulses of microwaves through the antenna at random intervals. If Prof Lin heard a sound, he pressed the switch.  

A single pulse sounded like a zip or a clicking finger. A series of pulses like a bird chirping. They were produced in his head rather than as sound waves coming from outside. Prof Lin believed the energy was absorbed by the soft brain tissue and converted to a pressure wave moving inside the head, which was interpreted by the brain as sound. This occurred when high-power microwaves were delivered as pulses rather than in the low-power continuous form you get from a modern microwave oven or other devices.

Illustration of man undergoing an experiment on his brain
Prof Lin recalls that he was careful not to dial it up too high. "I did not want to have my brain damaged," he told the BBC. 

In 1978, he found he was not alone in his interest, and received an unusual invitation to discuss his latest paper from a group of scientists who had been carrying out their own experiments. 

Short presentational grey line
During the Cold War, science was the focus of intense super-power rivalry. Even areas like mind control were explored,  amid fears of the other side getting an edge - and this included microwaves. 

Prof Lin was shown the Soviet approach at a centre of scientific research in the town of Pushchino, near Moscow. "They had a very elaborate, very well-equipped laboratory," Prof Lin recalls. But their experiment was cruder than his. The subject would sit in a drum of salty seawater with their head sticking out. Then microwaves would be fired at their brain. The scientists thought the microwaves interacted with the nervous system and wanted to question Prof Lin on his alternative view. 

Curiosity cut both ways, and US spies kept close track on Soviet research. A 1976 report by the US Defense Intelligence Agency, unearthed by the BBC, says it could find no proof of Communist-bloc microwave weapons, but says it had learnt of experiments where microwaves were pulsed at the throat of frogs until their hearts stopped. 

The report also reveals that the US was concerned Soviet microwaves could be used to impair brain function or induce sounds for psychological effect. "Their internal sound perception research has great potential for development into a system for disorienting or disrupting the behaviour patterns of military or diplomatic personnel." 

American interest was more than just defensive. James Lin would occasionally glimpse references to secret US work on weapons in the same field.

Short presentational grey line
And while Prof Lin was in Pushchino, another group of Americans not far away were worried that they were being zapped by microwaves - and that their own government had covered it up. 

For nearly a quarter of a century, the 10-storey US embassy in Moscow was bathed by a wide, invisible beam of low-level microwaves. It became known as "the Moscow signal". But for many years,  most of  those working inside knew nothing. 

The beam came from an antenna on the balcony of a nearby Soviet apartment and hit the upper floors of the embassy where the ambassador's office and more sensitive work was carried out. It had been first spotted in the 1950s and was later monitored from a room on the 10th floor. But its existence was a secret tightly held from all but a few working inside. "We were trying to figure out just what might be its purpose," explains Jack Matlock, number two at the embassy in the mid-70s.  

But a new ambassador, Walter Stoessel, arrived in 1974 and threatened to resign unless everyone was told. "That caused something like panic," recalls Mr Matlock. Embassy staff whose children were in a basement nursery were especially worried. But the State Department played down any risk.  

Then Ambassador Stoessel, himself, fell ill - with bleeding of the eyes as one of his symptoms. In a now declassified 1975 phone call to the Soviet ambassador to Washington, US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger linked Stoessel's illness to microwaves, admitting "we are trying to keep the thing quiet". Stoessel died of leukaemia at the age of 66. "He decided to play the good soldier", and not make a fuss, his daughter told the BBC.  

From 1976 screens were installed to protect people. But many diplomats were angry, believing the State Department had first kept quiet, and then resisted acknowledging any possible health impact. This was a claim echoed decades later with Havana syndrome. 

What was the Moscow signal for? "I'm pretty sure that the Soviets had intentions other than damaging us," says Matlock. They were ahead of the US in surveillance technology and one theory was that they bounced microwaves off windows to pick up conversations, another that they were activating their own listening devices hidden inside the building or capturing information through microwaves hitting US electronic devices (known as "peek and poke"). The Soviets at one point told Matlock that the purpose was actually to jam American equipment on the embassy roof used to intercept Soviet communications in Moscow.  

This is the world of surveillance and counter-surveillance, one so secret that even within embassies and governments only a few people know the full picture.   

One theory is that Havana involved a much more targeted method to carry out some kind of surveillance with higher-power, directed microwaves. One former UK intelligence official told the BBC that microwaves could be used to "illuminate" electronic devices to extract signals or identify and track them. Others speculate that a device (even perhaps an American one) might have been poorly engineered or malfunctioned and caused a physical reaction in some people. However, US officials tell the BBC no device has been identified or recovered. 

Short presentational grey line
After a lull, cases began to spread beyond Cuba. 

In December 2017, Marc Polymeropolous woke suddenly in a Moscow hotel room. A senior CIA officer, he was in town to meet Russian counterparts. "My ears were ringing, my head was spinning. I felt like I was going to vomit. I couldn't stand up," he told the BBC. "It was terrifying." It was a year after the first Havana cases, but the CIA medical office told him his symptoms didn't match the Cuban cases. A long battle for medical treatment began. The severe headaches never went away and in the summer of 2019 he was forced to retire.  

Mr Polymreopolous originally thought he had been hit by some kind of technical surveillance tool that had been "turned up too much". But when more cases emerged at the CIA which were all, he says, linked to people working on Russia, he came to believe he had been targeted with a weapon. 

But then came China, including at the consulate in Guangzhou in early 2018. 

Some of those affected in China contacted Beatrice Golomb, a professor at the University of California, San Diego, who has long researched the health effects of microwaves, as well as other unexplained illnesses. She told the BBC that she wrote to the State Department's medical team in January 2018 with a detailed account of why she thought microwaves were responsible. "This makes for interesting reading," was the non-committal response.  

Prof Golomb says high levels of radiation were recorded by family members of personnel in Guangzhou using commercially available equipment. "The needle went off the top of the available readings." But she says the State Department told its own employees that the measurements they had taken off their own back were classified.  

A host of problems plagued early investigations. There was a failure to collect consistent data. The State Department and CIA failed to communicate with each other, and the scepticism of their internal medical teams caused tension.  

Illustration of five secret agents in a room
Only one out of the nine cases from China was initially determined by the State Department to match the criteria for the syndrome based on Havana cases. That left others who experienced symptoms angry, and feeling as if they were being accused of making it up. They began a battle for equal treatment, which is still going on today. 

As frustration grew, some of those affected turned to Mark Zaid, a lawyer who specialises in national security cases. He now acts for around two dozen government personnel, half from the intelligence community. 

"This is not Havana syndrome. It's a misnomer," argues Mr Zaid, whose clients were affected in many locations. "What's been going on has been known by the United States government probably, based on evidence that I have seen, since the late 1960s."  

Since 2013, Mr Zaid has represented one employee of the US National Security Agency who believed they were damaged in 1996 in a location which remains classified.  

Mr Zaid questions why the US government has been so unwilling to acknowledge a longer history. One possibility, he says, is because it might open a Pandora's Box of incidents that have been ignored over the years. Another is because the US, too, has developed and perhaps even deployed microwaves itself and wants to keep it secret.  

The  country's interest in weaponising microwaves extended beyond the end of the Cold War. Reports say from the 1990s, the US Air Force had a project codenamed "Hello" to see if microwaves could create disturbing sounds in people's heads, one called "Goodbye" to test their use for crowd control, and one codenamed "Goodnight" to see if they could be used to kill people. Reports from a decade ago suggested these had not proved successful. 

But the study of the mind and what can be done to it has been receiving increased focus within the military and security world. 

"The brain is being seen as the 21st Century battle-scape," argues James Giordano, an adviser to the Pentagon and Professor in Neurology and Biochemistry at Georgetown University, who was asked to look at the initial Havana cases. "Brain sciences are global. It is not just the province of what used to be known as the West." Ways to both augment and damage brain function are being worked on, he told the BBC. But it is a field with little transparency or rules. 

He says China and Russia have been engaged in microwave research and raises the possibility that tools developed for industrial and commercial uses - for instance to test the impact of microwaves on materials - could have been repurposed. But he also wonders if disruption and spreading fear were also the aim.

This kind of technology may have been around for a while - and even have been used selectively. But that would still mean something changed in Cuba to get it noticed. 

Bill Evanina was a senior intelligence official when the Havana cases emerged, and stepped down as the head of the National Counterintelligence and Security Center this year. He has little doubt about what happened in Havana. "Was it an offensive weapon? I believe it was," he told the BBC. 

He believes microwaves may have been deployed in recent military conflicts, but points to specific circumstances to explain a shift. 

Cuba, 90 miles off the Florida coast, has long been an ideal site to collect "signals intelligence" by intercepting communications.  During the Cold War, it was home to a major Soviet listening station. When Vladimir Putin visited in 2014, reports suggested it was being re-opened. China also opened two sites in recent years, according to one source, while the Russians sent in 30 additional intelligence officers.  

But from 2015, the US was back in town. With its newly opened embassy and a beefed-up presence, the US was just beginning to establish its footing, collecting intelligence and pushing back against Russian and Chinese spies. "We were in a ground fight," one person recalls. 

Then the sounds began. 

"Who had the most to benefit from the closing of the embassy in Havana?" asks Mr Evanina. "If the Russian government was increasing and promulgating their intelligence collection in Cuba, it was probably not good for them to have the US in Cuba."  

Russia has repeatedly dismissed accusations it is involved, or has "directed microwave weapons". "Such provocative, baseless speculation and fanciful hypotheses can't really be considered a serious matter for comment," its foreign ministry has said.

And there have been sceptics about the very existence of Havana syndrome. They argue that the unique situation in Cuba supports their case. 

'Contagious' stress
Robert W Baloh, a Professor of Neurology at UCLA, has long studied unexplained health symptoms. When he saw the Havana syndrome reports, he concluded they were a mass psychogenic condition. He compares this to the way people feel sick when they are told they have eaten tainted food even if there was nothing wrong with it - the reverse of the placebo effect. "When you see mass psychogenic illness, there's usually some stressful underlying situation," he says. "In the case of Cuba and the mass of the embassy employees - particularly the CIA agents who first were affected - they certainly were in a stressful situation."  

In his view, every-day symptoms like brain fog and dizziness are reframed - by sufferers, media and health professionals - as the syndrome. "The symptoms are as real as any other symptoms," he says, arguing that individuals became hyper-aware and fearful as reports spread, especially within a closed community.  This, he believes, then became contagious among other US officials serving abroad. 

There remain many unexplained elements. Why did Canadian diplomats report symptoms in Havana? Were they collateral damage from targeting nearby Americans? And why have no UK officials reported symptoms? "The Russians have literally tried to kill people on British soil in recent years with radioactive materials, yet why are there no reported cases?" asks Mark Zaid.  "I would probably put on pause the statement that no-one in the UK has experienced any symptoms," responds Bill Evanina, who says the US is now sharing details with allies to spot cases.  

Some instances may be unrelated. "We had a bunch of military folk in the Middle East who claimed to have this attack - turned out they had food poisoning," says one former official. "We need to separate the wheat from the chaff," reckons Mark Zaid, who says members of the public, some with mental health issues, approach him claiming to suffer from microwave attacks. One former official reckons around half the cases reported by US officials are possibly linked to attacks by an adversary. Others say the real number could be even smaller.

A December 2020 report by the US National Academies of Sciences was a pivotal moment. Experts took evidence from scientists and clinicians as well as eight victims. "It was quite dramatic," recalls Professor David Relman of Stanford, who chaired the panel. "Some of these people literally were in hiding, for fear of further actions against them by whomever. There were actually precautions we had to take to ensure their safety." The panel looked at psychological and other causes, but concluded that directed, high energy, pulsed microwaves were most likely responsible for some of the cases, similar to the view of James Lin, who gave evidence.  

Short presentational grey line
But even though the State Department sponsored the study, it still considers the conclusion only a plausible hypothesis and officials say they have not found further evidence to support it.  

The Biden administration has signalled it is taking the issue seriously. CIA and State Department officials are given advice on how to respond to incidents (including 'getting off the X' - meaning physically moving from a spot if they feel they are getting hit). The State Department has set up a task force to support staff over what are now called "unexplained health incidents". Previous attempts to categorise cases as to whether they met specific criteria have been abandoned. But without a definition, it becomes harder to count. 

This year, a new wave of cases arrived - including Berlin and a larger group in Vienna. In August, a trip by US Vice-President Kamala Harris to Vietnam was delayed three hours because of a reported case at the embassy in Hanoi. Worried diplomats are now asking questions before taking foreign assignments with their families. 

"This is a major distraction for us if we think that the Russians are doing things to our intelligence officers who are travelling," says former CIA officer Polymreopolous, who finally received the medical treatment he wanted this year. "That's going to put a crimp in our operational footprint."  

The CIA has taken over the hunt for a cause, with a veteran of the hunt for Osama bin Laden placed in charge.  

Markers in the blood
An accusation that another state has been harming US officials is a consequential one. "That's an act of war," says Mr Polymeropolous. That makes it a high bar to reach. Policymakers will demand hard evidence, which so far, officials say, is still lacking.

Five years on, some US officials say little more is known other than when Havana syndrome started. But others disagree. They say the evidence for microwaves is much stronger now, if not yet conclusive. The BBC has learnt that new evidence is arriving as data is collected and analysed more systematically for the first time. Some of the cases this year showed specific markers in the blood, indicating brain injury. These markers fall away after a few days and previously too much time had elapsed to spot them. But now that people are being tested much more quickly after reporting symptoms, they have been seen for the first time.  

The debate remains divisive and it is possible the answer is complex. There may be a core of real cases, while others have been folded into the syndrome. Officials raise the possibility that the technology and the intent might have changed over time, perhaps shifting to try and unsettle the US. Some even worry one state may have piggy-backed on another's activities. "We like a simple label diagnosis," argues Professor Relman. "But sometimes it is tough to achieve. And when we can't, we have to be very careful not to simply throw up our hands and walk away."

The mystery of Havana syndrome could be its real power. The ambiguity and fear it spreads act as a multiplier, making more and more people wonder if they are suffering, and making it harder for spies and diplomats to operate overseas. Even if it began as a tightly defined incident, Havana syndrome may have developed a life of its own.

The latest episodes of so-called Havana syndrome, a series of unexplained ailments afflicting U.S. and Canadian diplomats and spies, span the globe. They include two diplomats in Hanoi, Vietnam—which disrupted Vice President Kamala Harris’s foreign travel schedule—in August, several dozen reports at the U.S. Embassy in Vienna earlier this year, and a pair of incidents at the White House last November.

The cause of these incidents is unknown, but speculation in the U.S. centers on electromagnetic beams.

If Havana syndrome turns out to be caused by weapons that shoot energy beams, they won’t be the first such weapons. As an aerospace engineer and former Vice Chair of the U.S. Air Force Scientific Advisory Board, I’ve researched directed energy. I can also personally attest to the effectiveness of directed energy weapons.

In 2020, a study on Havana syndrome by the U.S. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine concluded that the more than 130 victims experienced some real physical phenomena, and that the cause was most likely some form of electromagnetic radiation. These incidents began in 2016 with reports of multiple personnel at the U.S. embassy in Havana, Cuba,experiencing alarming and unexplained symptoms. The symptoms included a feeling of pressure on the face, loud noises, severe headaches, nausea and confusion. In some cases, the victims seem to have been left with permanent health effects.

Scientists from Cuba’s Academy of Sciences issued a report refuting the U.S. National Academies report and ascribing the reported symptoms to psychological effects or a range of ordinary ailments and preexisting conditions. But based on my own experience, directed energy appears to be a plausible explanation.

Related articles

Today's D Brief: Milley looks ahead; New ‘Anti-China alliance’; US drawing down in Iraq; Havana syndrome latest; And a bit more.

Cuba Says Cicadas Are Behind the 'Sonic Attacks' That Injured U.S. Diplomats in Havana


Here’s how these beams affect people.

There is a very wide range of electromagnetic waves that are characterized by wavelength, which is the distance between successive peaks. These waves can interact with different types of matter, including human bodies, in a variety of ways. 

At short wavelengths, a few hundred-billionths of a meter, ultraviolet rays from the Sun can burn the skin’s surface if someone is exposed for too long. Microwaves have longer wavelengths. People use these every day to reheat meals. Microwaves transfer energy into the water molecules inside food.

The U.S. military has developed a directed energy technology that shoots beams of a slightly longer wavelength in a focused area over distances up to a mile. This directed energy technology was designed for nonlethal control of crowds. When these waves interact with a person, they pass through the skin and transfer energy to the water that lies just under the surface.

I had the opportunity to be zapped by one of these systems. I stood about a half-mile from the source and the beam was turned on. The portion of my body exposed to the beam got hot really quickly, and I immediately stepped out of the beam. The feeling was as though someone had just opened the door of a large furnace right by me. 

At even longer wavelengths, electromagnetic radiation can interact with electronic systems and can be used to disable computers and control systems. For these waves, interaction with matter generates electrical currents and fields that interfere with the electrical systems. The military is developing these technologies to defend against drone attacks.

It’s plausible that at just the right wavelength, an electromagnetic beam could be projected over hundreds of yards to create the symptoms seen in Havana syndrome incidents. If this is the case, it’s likely that these beams are interfering with the electrical functions of the brain and central nervous system. 

For example, the Frey effect involves microwaves activating the auditory sensory nerves. Other studies have noted potential effects of microwaves on the central nervous system, such as decreased response time, social dysfunction and anxiety. 

Further study is needed to determine the cause of Havana syndrome incidents. Unfortunately, this type of electromagnetic radiation does not leave a telltale trace like sunburn, which makes it difficult to be certain of the explanation. 

While the results of the National Academies study were made public, it is likely that federal agencies are carrying out additional activities behind the scenes to try to explain these incidents and determine who is to blame. Similar to responding to cyberattacks, though, the government may be reluctant to release too much information to the public because it could reveal techniques for detecting and countering the attacks.

If the source of Havana syndrome turns out to be electromagnetic waves, then in principle, buildings could be hardened against them. However, it would be expensive and would still leave people vulnerable outdoors. Perhaps the best option to prevent further attack is detection. It is relatively simple and inexpensive to install sensors to detect electromagnetic waves on buildings and vehicles. Such sensors could also help identify the location of the source of the attacks and, in this way, act as a deterrent. 

Assuming Havana syndrome is the result of deliberately targeted electromagnetic beams, employees of the U.S. government and other nations will remain susceptible to these attacks until governments take such defensive measures

In 2016, dozens of diplomatic staff at the U.S. and Canadian embassies in Havana began experiencing a sudden onset of health troubles with no apparent cause. They reported a variety of symptoms, including vertigo, nausea, vision and hearing difficulties, memory loss, and headaches. Many said they felt something pressing or vibrating around them or heard noises just before the symptoms appeared, leading some to suspect they had been exposed to a high-intensity burst of energy or sound waves.

Known as Havana syndrome, today there are at least 200 CIA, State Department, and Pentagon personnel stationed overseas who have been affected. (President Biden signed a bill on Friday providing financial help to victims.) Intelligence agencies have been unable to determine what’s behind the incidents, although some officials believe they are the result of attacks by a U.S. adversary. Now, a recent flurry of high-ranking U.S. diplomats, spies, and security aides have been treated for Havana syndrome, possibly signaling an escalation of some sort, intelligence analysts say.

“Perhaps this is a message sent — that nobody is immune to this,” said former CIA senior operations officer Marc Polymeropoulos during a recent Harvard Kennedy School talk with Paul Kolbe, director of the Belfer Center’s Intelligence Project, and Adam Entous, staff writer at The New Yorker, who started reporting on the topic in 2018.

The most recent victims include a U.S. diplomat in Serbia who was evacuated by the CIA last month, according to a Wall Street Journal report, and an aide traveling with CIA Director William Burns in India who developed symptoms. In August, Vice President Kamala Harris’ trip to Vietnam was delayed after two officials at the U.S. embassy in Hanoi became ill. The CIA replaced its Vienna station chief for failing to adequately respond to reports of Havana syndrome-like symptoms by two dozen intelligence officers and diplomats this summer. Police in Vienna are investigating the incidents.

Havana Syndrome panel.
“I lost my long-distance vision. I couldn’t drive. I could barely go to work,” said Marc Polymeropoulos, who experienced Havana syndrome firsthand. Polymeropoulos (clockwise from left), Paul Kolbe, and Adam Entous discussed who might be behind what they see as a national security threat.

The cause of these illnesses has not been identified, but one theory is high-intensity microwaves may be to blame. Russia has a well-documented history dating back to Josef Stalin of using microwaves against the U.S. to disrupt intelligence operations. An assessment of Havana embassy victims by the National Academies of Science in 2020 said “directed, pulsed Radio Frequency energy” was the “most plausible” primary source of those injuries. Private companies sell weapons systems that use directed energy to knock out drones.

“This is not newfound technology,” said Polymeropoulos, a 26-year counterterrorism specialist who believes he was attacked during a trip to Russia in late 2017. “I think we know what it is.”

As the CIA’s deputy chief of operations for Europe and Eurasia, he went to Moscow to meet with the U.S. ambassador and embassy officials, as well as his counterparts in Russian security services. Though the Russians were “not thrilled” to see him and he was surveilled and hassled by authorities, there had been nothing alarming about the trip to that point, said Polymeropoulos.

Then one night, he woke up in his hotel room with vertigo-like symptoms.

“The room was spinning. I had a blinding headache; I had ringing in my ears; I felt like I was going to be physically sick,” said Polymeropoulos. “This was pretty alarming and frankly, a scary incident, because I’d lost control.”

Back in the U.S., he sought help for what he first thought were lingering effects of severe food poisoning. From neurologists to infectious disease specialists, none were able to offer a conclusive diagnosis, and his health grew worse throughout 2018.

“I lost my long-distance vision. I couldn’t drive. I could barely go to work. I was pretty incapacitated,” he said.

Victims say the U.S. government, which calls Havana syndrome a “possible anomalous health incident,” has been slow to see a connection between those affected, to label the incidents as attacks, or to even acknowledge victims suffered from a physical illness.

A 2018 FBI report on the Havana embassy victims declared their conditions psychologically-driven, most likely due to stress. That “undermined” the efforts of those stricken, including Polymeropoulos, to get U.S. intelligence to take seriously Havana syndrome and the national security threat it posed, said Entous.

Still experiencing debilitating symptoms with no relief in sight, Polymeropoulos retired in 2019. Frustrated by the CIA’s inaction, he took his story public last year. In January he was admitted to the traumatic brain injury program at Walter Reed National Intrepid Center of Excellence, where he was diagnosed with occipital neuralgia. Traumatic brain injury is now the most common diagnosis, said Polymeropoulos, who has spoken to many other victims. 

‘Largely guessing’
Though President Donald Trump publicly accused Cuba, “the suspicion right from the very beginning of the Trump administration … was that the Russians or the Chinese were responsible,” said Entous. “And that was based on who’s got the technological capabilities, who’s got the ability to project force in these parts of the world.”

Some Obama officials also believed Russia could be to blame. The Russians were very unhappy about the U.S. role in the Maidan Revolution in 2014 and other efforts to pull Ukraine closer to Europe. They also may have gotten wind of secret diplomatic talks between the U.S. and Cuba that had begun in spring 2013 and progressed well into 2014. President Barack Obama’s speech during his historic visit to Cuba in March 2016 had been well received, perhaps further irritating the Russians, said Entous.

Red Square in Moscow.
Revelations of cyberattacks on U.S. likely just ‘tip of the iceberg’
Espionage aimed at government, big business was ‘sustained, targeted, far-reaching,’ analysts say

John Brennan, John Ferguson, and Tamir Pardo.
Intel agencies in an age of ‘nuclear’ cyberattacks, political assassinations
Top U.S., Israeli leaders detail most dangerous, complex foreign threats

But no one knew for sure.

“American officials were largely guessing,” said Entous. “I remember John Bolton, the national security adviser, was split 50/50 between China and Russia being the most likely culprit. When it happened in China [April 2018], he decided it must be Russia because he doubted the Chinese would do it in their own backyard. So that gives you a sense of the grasping-at-straws nature of this, rather than these assessments being based on concrete intelligence.”

Though not enough to establish “high confidence,” there is circumstantial evidence that points to Russia. U.S. intelligence has cellphone data of Russian military intelligence officers who were in the vicinity of Americans at the same time they fell victim to Havana syndrome. Many of the officers have been part of other Russian operations, said Polymeropoulos.

The attacks fit the Russian government’s penchant for outlandish acts of aggression on foreign soil, including the 2006 poisoning in London of Alexander Litvinenko, a former Russian Federal Security Service officer, with a radioactive isotope; the 2018 attack on former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter in England with a military nerve agent; and the 2019 shooting death of a Chechen separatist at a Berlin park in broad daylight, said Kolbe.

And the elements of the attacks fit “all the parameters” of hybrid warfare — “profoundly asymmetric,” not attributable or very hard to trace, extremely disruptive, and deniable, he added.

It’s a combat style the Russians, among others, favor.

A suite of measures
The quickening tempo of attacks and close proximity to Harris and Burns has escalated the sense of urgency in intelligence circles to positively identify the perpetrator and formulate an effective U.S. response.

“This has been an ongoing source of tension within the intelligence community, our reluctance to respond to these provocations as they’re happening,” said Entous. During the final days of the Trump administration, some ideas for how to respond were discussed by Pentagon officials but they “didn’t go anywhere” because many thought Russia was merely doing it as a “provocation,” he said.

Now that Burns has put counterterrorism experts out front, Polymeropoulos said he’s “confident” we’ll find out “soon” who is behind the attacks.

“There’s going to be a lot of pressure to take some relatively severe action,” perhaps even “a suite of measures,” he said.

But whether the U.S. will finally respond consequentially remains an open question.

“Are we going to be able to do enough to … ‘detect, disrupt, deter’? That’s sacrosanct language in the counterterrorism community,” he said. “Those policy recommendations are what we’re all going to be looking at, because that is how this is going to be stopped.”

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine last month published a report summarizing its investigation into the illnesses of 50 American diplomats in Cuba in 2016 and China in 2017. The illnesses are typically referred to as the Havana Syndrome.

According to the report, “An Assessment of Illness in U.S. Government Employees and Their Families at Overseas Embassies,” the symptoms experienced by the subjects of the investigation manifested like concussions, but without force to the head:

“For some of these patients, their case began with the sudden onset of a loud noise, perceived to have directional features, and accompanied by pain in one or both ears or across a broad region of the head, and in some cases, a sensation of head pressure or vibration, dizziness, followed in some cases by tinnitus, visual problems, vertigo, and cognitive difficulties.”

The National Academies report concluded that there were “multiple hypotheses” as to what caused these symptoms, “but evidence has been lacking, no hypothesis has been proven and the circumstances remain unclear.”

However some experts believe microwave weapon attacks to be the most plausible explanation for the illnesses reported by diplomats and family members.

Weaponizing microwave technology

Microwave auditory effect, also called the Frey effect after the scientist who discovered it in 1961, is the human perception of sound and speech in the brain, induced by pulsed and directed radio frequencies. This technology has been weaponized by Russia, China and the United States.

In 2018, the New York Times reported on illnesses of diplomats and their families:

“James C. Lin of the University of Illinois, a leading investigator of the Frey effect, described the diplomatic ills as plausibly arising from microwave beams. Dr. Lin is the editor-in-chief of Bio Electro Magnetics, a peer-reviewed journal that explores the effects of radio waves and electromagnetic fields on living things. In his paper, he said high-intensity beams of microwaves could have caused the diplomats to experience not just loud noises but nausea, headaches and vertigo, as well as possible brain-tissue injury. The beams, he added, could be fired covertly, hitting ‘only the intended target.’”

The Times article included a reference to the work of Beatrice A. Golomb, a medical doctor and professor of medicine at the University of California, San Diego, who, according to the Times, has to date made the “most detailed medical case” for microwave strikes as the cause of the illnesses experienced by diplomats:

“In a forthcoming paper to be published in October in Neural Computation, a peer-reviewed journal of the MIT Press, she lays out potential medical evidence for Cuban microwave strikes. She compared the symptoms of the diplomats in Cuba to those reported for individuals said to be suffering from radio-frequency sickness. The health responses of the two groups, Dr. Golomb wrote, ‘conform closely.’”

The Times also reported on the opinion of a lawyer representing some of the victims:

“But Mr. Zaid, the Washington lawyer who represents eight of the diplomats and family members, said microwave attacks may have injured his clients. ‘It’s sort of naïve to think this just started now,’ he said. Globally, he added, covert strikes with the potent beams appear to have been going on for decades.”

The U.S. military’s role in microwave weapons

While many sources such as The Diplomat are quick to attribute the use of covert microwave weapons exclusively to Russia or China, in fact, the U.S. has a long history of developing the very same weapons.

In 2002, U.S. Air Force scientists invented (Patent Numbers US6,470,214 B1, US6,587,729B2) a method for encoding and transmitting speech by means of radio frequency. The patents report states: “The invention provides a new and useful encoding for speech on an RF carrier such that the speech will be intelligible to a human subject by means of the RF hearing demodulation phenomena.”

The lead inventor, Jim O’Loughlin, explained in an Air Force memorandum how the power of radio frequency signals could be modulated to replicate the amplitude-frequency characteristics of audible speech input, and then thermally induce nerve signals that result in the hearing of the transmitted, encoded speech in the brain:

“Everything of an acoustic nature is sent to the brain from the inner ear by nerve signals, the brain cannot hear acoustic signals directly nor can it hear RF signals directly. Everything of an acoustic nature received by the inner ear is from two possible sources, the air acoustic stimulation, such as speech, passed through the outer ear, eardrum, ossicles, and cochlea; or by the conduction of an acoustic signal through the bone/tissue structure of the head directly to the cochlea. Within the cochlea is the basilar membrane that converts the acoustic input to nerve signals, be the original source of the acoustic signal from the outer ear or from bone/tissue conduction. The nerve signals from the basilar membrane go to the brain and the brain does not recognize nor distinguish between the two primary acoustic origins. The acoustic stimulation in material such as bone/tissue is a mechanical vibration, or pressure or relative motion of the material in the form of compressions and rarefactions that compromise the textbook definition of sound or acoustic waves. This stimulation can be accomplished by the application of direct mechanical force or as in the case of the invention by thermally induced-mechanical force or pressure wave. When material such as bone/tissue is heated it expands or moves and if the application of heat is applied at a periodic rate, a thermal-mechanical force and corresponding acoustic pressure wave is the result.”

In 2003, the U.S. Navy funded a government contract to design a microwave auditory effect system called the Mob Excess Deterrent Using Silent Audio (MEDUSA) to incapacitate attackers or mobs and to protect assets. The Navy reported experimental success in phase 1 of the contract:

“MAE results in a strong sound sensation in the human head when it is irradiated with specifically selected microwave pulses of low energy. Through the combination of pulse parameters and pulse power, it is possible to raise the auditory sensation to the ‘discomfort’ level, deterring personnel from entering a protected perimeter or, if necessary, temporarily incapacitating particular individuals.”

The military regards this technology, which can remotely target individuals or crowds with painful sounds that cannot be blocked out, as non-lethal and having only a temporary effect.

But some scientists worry about long-term brain damage and adverse side effects. A 2008 press release in New Scientist described the effect of the MEDUSA weapon this way: “short microwave pulses rapidly heat tissue, causing a shockwave inside the skull.”

Psychotronic weaponry, microwave syndrome

In 2001, the Pentagon announced another crowd-control energy weapon called the Active Denial System. The New York Times reported that “the weapon would fire bursts of electromagnetic energy capable of causing burning sensations on the skin of people standing as far as 700 yards away — without actually burning them.”

According to a Pentagon informational video, the Active Denial System uses millimeter waves, instead of the microwaves in the previously described weapons. This raises a new level of concern for the implementation of 5G, a millimeter wave technology, potentially becoming weaponized in civil unrest under a tyrannical government.

While the U.S. media alludes to a mysterious “Havana Syndrome” when reporting on the 2016 U.S. Embassy attacks in Cuba, the scientific community refers to these diagnosable symptoms as microwave syndrome or radiofrequency sickness as established in 1998.

Technically, the illness is called microwave radiation syndrome, but that term is not used today to avoid instilling fear in the general public of actual radiation exposure. The term “microwave radiation” began to disappear from literature in the 1960s when the public filed several legal challenges against military radar systems near valuable coastal properties, citing concerns about health and property devaluation. The term was replaced with microwave energy, microwave fields and radiofrequency fields in military and commercial enterprises.

A 2003 study by E.A. Navarro, “The Microwave Syndrome: A Preliminary Study in Spain,” published in Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine, reported the short-term detrimental health effects of exposure to microwave and radiofrequency fields:

“Symptoms and signs include headache, fatigue, irritability, loss of appetite, sleepiness, difficulties in concentration or memory, depression, and emotional instability. This clinical syndrome is generally reversible if RF exposure is discontinued. Another frequently described manifestation is a set of labile functional cardiovascular changes including bradycardia, arterial hypertension, or hypotension (Johnson-Liakouris, 1998). This form of neurocirculatory asthenia is also attributed to nervous system influence. More serious but less frequent neurologic or neuropsychiatric disturbances have occasionally been described as a diencephalic syndrome (Johnson-Liakouris, 1998). All these disturbances following low level exposures (of the order of microwatts/cm2) have been reported for many years from Eastern Europe.”

Navarro also reported the long-term detrimental health effects of microwave radiation:

“Insomnia, cancer, leukemia in children, and brain tumors are the clinical entities more frequently described (Dolk et al., 1997; Hocking et al., 1996; Maskarinec et al., 1994; Minder and Pfluger, 2001; Selvin et al., 1992).” Because the brain consists of a high water content, it is one of the most likely places for a hotspot to form from microwave radiation. The human head becomes a receiving antenna for the microwaves.”

Extremely Low Frequency (ELF) Fields also lower melatonin, a powerful antioxidant that supports immune function, according to a 1993 study in the Journal of General Psychology.

It is suspicious that the U.S. has taken such an inconclusive position on the diagnoses of the recent microwave weapon attacks in Cuba and China given the precedent of the Moscow microwave attacks in the 1950s. Mary Ellen O’Connor summarized the history of the Moscow attacks in 1993, in the Journal of General Psychology:

“From 1953 to 1976, the Soviets directed microwave radiation at the U.S. embassy in Moscow from the roof of an adjacent building. The possibility that this microwave exposure could induce health problems in the embassy staff prompted the government to begin classified research programs on the health effects of microwave exposure. One of these programs, called “Project Pandora,” was organized and administered by the psychology division of the psychiatry research section of Walter Reed Army Institute of Research (WRAIR). Public attention was not drawn to these events in Moscow and the question of possible health effects from NIEM exposure until the 1976 release of information by the U.S. State Department accusing the Soviet Union of bombarding the U.S. embassy in Moscow with microwave radiation for the purpose of disturbing the health of the staff.”

Many of the afflicted diplomats will retire early with debilitating neurological symptoms likely caused by pulsed microwave frequencies. What will be the effect of continuous millimeter frequency exposure on the general public?

The lack of transparency around the recent attack on U.S. diplomats with a weaponized form of this technology, combined with the fact that hundreds of medical doctors have requested a moratorium on 5G RF technology until the negative health effects are properly studied and evaluated, should give the general public reason to reevaluate the unsubstantiated safety claims of 5G.

Unfortunately, the telecommunications industry has convinced governments to believe in a no-risk paradigm for 5G by influencing scientific reports and committees using biased individuals with conflicts of interest.

American scientists have been struggling to unravel the cause of a “mystery illness” for years, after reports of incapacitating neurologic symptoms were experienced in American and Canadian government officials stationed in Cuba in 2016 (AKA-The Havana Syndrome), and American diplomats in China in 2018. More recently similar attacks have been reported on U.S. soil and later in 2021 in Vienna. This variable and perplexing array of symptoms were reported in diplomats, their families, and even their pets intermittently, but usually at night in homes and hotels, with many developing permanent neurologic effects from what physicians termed was a form of “functional brain injury”. The National Academies of Sciences now has the answer- directed microwave radiation beams of “energy”. Congress is moving to pass a bill to pay for medical treatment of the brain injuries suffered by U.S. diplomats and their families.

The distinctive symptoms experienced by the victims included headaches, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, insomnia, imbalance, nosebleeds, memory loss, hives, ringing in the ears and hearing loss.   Odd sounds such as chirping, ringing, grinding or humming, were also experienced, that were loud, emanated from a distinct direction that appeared to follow the individual and could not be reduced by putting their hands over their ears.  The health effects mirror those of individuals who have developed electrosensitivity (EHS) or electromagnetic illness in the presence of wireless devices such as Wi Fi, Cell Towers and cell phones, which emit pulsed radiofrequency radiation. The National Academy of Sciences in 2020 looked at the evidence and they concluded as well that pulsed radiofrequency radiation is the most plausible explanation for the diplomat’s symptomatology. This is a story of political and medical intrigue. 


Updated 11/13/21

More recently, news articles have reported that over 130 personnel and their families have been affected with long term symptoms so severe that they needed ongoing treatment. The New York Post reported, “In one 2019 case, the outlet reported, a military officer driving with his 2-year-old son while serving overseas became overcome with nausea and headaches after pulling over at an intersection. The young boy also began crying in the backseat. After driving away, the pain stopped and the child ceased crying.” Secretary of State Antony Blinken announced on Nov5, 2021 that he has assigned two career diplomats to oversee the State Department investigation of the “Havana syndrome,” deploying “new technology to U.S. missions around the world to help understand the cause.”

Brain Alterations in White Matter Tracks

Physicians have found changes in the white matter tracks of the brain in affected embassy workers. White matter consists of bundles of nerves which are individually surrounded by a lipid layer (myelinated) creating tracks or “highways that connect regions of the brain” and bridging gray matter. White matter tracks are central to learning, memory and coordination of communication. Verma et al (2019) performed neuroimaging of 40 affected government personnel and concluded in the JAMA article, “Among US government personnel in Havana, Cuba, with potential directional phenomena exposure, compared with healthy controls, advanced brain MRI techniques revealed significant neuroimaging differences in whole brain white matter volume, regional gray and white matter volume, cerebellar tissue microstructural integrity, and functional connectivity in the auditory and visuospatial subnetworks. ” They highlight that these ultrastructural changes are consistent with traumatic brain injury.

Single High Powered Microwave Pulses Causing Traumatic Brain Injury

The mechanism of injury is still being researched with some attributing this to a sharp increase in heat with microsecond intense peak pulses that could create “thermoelastic stress waves “. These could initiate soft tissue injury and mimic stressor effects of traumatic brain injury. Dagro et al (2021) performed a computational analysis of the neuropathological effects of single high powered pulses of EMF noting, “These studies reveal that the MAE [microwave hearing] threshold depends on the energy in a single pulse (not the average power density) for sufficiently short pulses [e.g., 32 μs in (46)], and peak power densities of 102 to 105 mW/cm2 have been known to cause auditory effects in human participants (45).” They also point out research demonstrating that high-peak-power pulsed  “microwave exposures were affecting cognitive function in the rats, particularly the decision-making process.” Raslear TG et al (1993)

The Havana Act of 2021 to Compensate Victims of Microwave Weapon Attacks

Senator Susan Collins (R-ME) introduced S.1828, the HAVANA Act or the “Helping American Victims Afflicted by Neurological Attacks” Act of 2021, which unanimously passed the Senate June 7, 2021. This Act amended the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 to authorize the payments to personnel of the Central Intelligence Agency who incurred “qualifying injuries to the brain” such as happened in Havana, China and Europe. This was in response to a hearing in which it was revealed that these government personnel were not getting appropriate diagnosis and treatment. This has bipartisan support.

NSA Whistleblower Writes to the U.S. Senators

NSA Intelligence analyst and whistleblower Karen Melton Stewart wrote a pointed letter to Senators Mark Warner (D-VA), Marco Rubio (R-FL), Susan Collins (R-ME) and Jeanne Sheehan (D-NH) dated June 2, 2021. Her letter states, “Please write an all-encompassing piece of legislation to stop this horror of the exploitation of innocent people with Microwave Weapons (and other DEW Directed Energy) attacks…Innocent people are thrown onto the watchlist, based on little to nothing, with no notification or warning…using this new secret underclass of “untouchables” as nonconsenting test subjects for Military Industrial Complex weaponry such as Directed Energy Weapons like microwave, millimeter waves, lily waves,weaponized WiFi…as well as war-grade gases, poisons…”

CBS Interviews the Diplomats

Interviews of the victims were shown on a 60 minutes episode 3/17/19 with diplomats relating in detail their physical symptoms. Robyn Garfield, a trade officer with the Commerce Department stationed in Shanghai, reported the “sound” attacks he experienced were for months on end. His wife Britta said one attack felt like an electric shock that temporarily paralyzed her. The couple stated there were effects on their children, who suffered blurred vision and loss of balance, with their daughter just suddenly falling on her side one day. 

Catherine Werner, a U.S. Commerce Department trade officer stationed in Guangzhou, China, developed headaches, extreme fatigue, vomiting, nosebleeds and ringing in the ears when the attacks started. Her dogs were throwing up blood.  When her mother arrived to help her, she became sick with the same symptoms. 

Mark Beck, a National Security Agency counterintelligence officer, developed de novo Parkinson’s which he later attributed to events occurring 20 years earlier in 1996 when he was stationed for a week in a hostile country.  His co-worker who traveled with him that week also developed Parkinson’s Disease. An unclassified version of the NSA intelligence report Beck later read, stated that the hostile country’s weapon was a “high-powered microwave system weapon that may have the ability to weaken, intimidate, or kill an enemy over time without leaving evidence…this weapon is designed to bathe a target’s living quarters in microwaves.” and that it is designed to cause “numerous physical effects, including a damaged nervous system.”  

American Cuban Relations Become Tense in 2015

An article in the New Yorker explains how American Cuban relations that were built during the Obama administration became tense in 2015 with the announcement of the new administration, resulting in either Cuba or Russia, and later China, being blamed for the attacks on diplomats in Cuba that grew weekly from December 2015. This led to the withdrawal of most of the U.S. officials from Cuba who underwent comprehensive medical examinations and testing. 

Dr. Douglas Smith, the director of the Center for Brain Injury and Repair, at the University of Pennsylvania, convened a group of experts who initially thought the symptoms could be psychosomatic. However, after interviewing the patients he said, “There was not one individual on the team who was not convinced that this was a real thing”. Physicians did not know what this condition was, but called it “Havana Syndrome”, Cuba Syndrome”, or the “Immaculate Concussion”, as there was no physical evidence at the scene of a weapon or device. 

Senate Hearings Confirm Health Consequences

At a Senate Hearing on the attacks of the U.S. Diplomats on January 9, 2018,  U.S. Senator Menendez from New jersey stated,“It is also our understanding that upon finally accepting that the employees were suffering life-altering health consequences, the Department took months to arrange for the appropriate care. It was almost a year before the Department put the embassy on ordered departure status, and only after reports surfaced in the media.”

The University of Pennsylvania Report Published in JAMA

Dr.  Douglas Smith and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania ultimately published a retrospective study of 24 affected government personnel in Havana, Cuba, in the March 20, 2018 edition of the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) Swanson et al (2018).    The authors thoroughly reviewed the medical records, and clinical tests of vestibular, oculomotor, cognitive, and audiometric function, in addition to neuroimaging. They found “widespread brain network dysfunction”, with 86% of the victims having sleep impairment, 86% with ocular symptoms, 81% with cognitive abnormalities, 76% with headaches and 68% with auditory symptoms. 67% of the cohort was out of work 203 days after the attacks. Some have recovered fully with “cognitive rehabilitation” but others have had symptoms recur. The authors concluded the cause was “of unclear origin” but “These individuals appeared to have sustained injury to widespread brain networks without an associated history of head trauma.”They listed it as an “acquired brain injury from a directional exposure of undetermined etiology”from an unnatural source.

“It’s an act of war,” said Christopher Miller, former President Donald Trump’s last acting secretary of defense. He was talking about alleged attacks on diplomatic and intelligence personnel by an unknown microwave directed-energy weapon. But before the United States declares war on the unknown enemy wielding that weapon, we should know what it is—and whether it exists at all.

Every few weeks, another alleged attack on Americans is reported, some recent, some decades ago. The symptoms are neurological, such as dizziness, headaches, and brain damage. The first wave of reports came in 2016, from the American and Canadian diplomatic missions in Havana, hence the name “Havana syndrome.” Since then, similar cases have been reported in other places, including China; Washington, D.C.; and Syria. State Department and intelligence personnel make up most of those affected.

The State Department and the CIA have investigated Havana syndrome, with much criticism by the victims and their legal counsel. The Jasons, a group of defense advisors, have been reported to be studying the incidents. Most recently, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine also conducted a study that concluded a microwave attack was the most plausible explanation; it also considered chemical pollutants, infectious agents, and psychological and social factors, and found all these explanations wanting.

Here’s the problem. Aside from the reported syndromes, there’s no evidence that a microwave weapon exists—and all the available science suggests that any such weapon would be wildly impractical. It’s possible that the symptoms of all the sufferers of Havana syndrome share a single, as yet unknown, cause; it’s also possible that multiple real health problems have been amalgamated into a single syndrome.


It’s not the first time microwaves and embassies have mixed. From 1953 to 1976, the U.S. Embassy in Moscow was bathed in high-powered microwaves coming from a nearby building. The purpose seems to have been related to espionage—activating listening devices within the embassy or interfering with American transmissions. But a 1978 study concluded that there were no adverse health effects.

Back in the United States, microwave ovens came into common use during the 1970s. Their ability to heat food by imperceptible waves created many myths. How they actually work is well understood. Some molecules, notably water, absorb microwaves and turn them into heat. That happens across the microwave and visible spectrum: Substances absorb energy of a higher frequency and turn it into heat. It’s why sunlight heats surfaces.

There’s a persistent myth that microwaves heat things from the inside out. Anyone who has heated a frozen dinner knows that this is not true. The outer part of the frozen food thaws first, because it absorbs the microwaves before they can reach the inner part. Back in the day, when I was working for the Los Alamos National Laboratory, I had to debunk the idea that microwave heating could produce oil from underground oil shale. Water and minerals between the shale and the microwave source above ground would absorb the microwaves. In the same way, if a directed microwave beam hit people’s brains, we would expect to see visible effects on the skin and flesh. None of that has accompanied Havana syndrome.

Yet the military has always hoped for death rays. Masers, microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation, and lasers, the same but for light, offered some of the characteristics of a death ray. Their wave structure was coherent—all the waves were lined up—and collimated into a fine beam. All that was needed was more energy. Scientists and engineers started working on these possibilities back in the 1970s, some of them alongside the laser isotope separation program where I worked. None of this research has yet resulted in usable or practical weapons.

Initially, for chemists, the extremely narrow wavelength range offered promise. The vibrations of molecules correspond to particular wavelengths of visible and infrared light. If you could irradiate a particular bond that you wanted to react, you might control chemical reactions. That was the basis for early concepts of laser isotope separation, but many other applications might be possible.

You can think of molecules as a collection of atoms attached to each other by springs that vibrate at characteristic frequencies. If you make one of those springs vibrate more than usual, the energy will quickly activate the other springs. From there, it makes the entire molecule rotate and move in space. That motion is heat.

On this week's episode of The E.R. Podcast, the panel discusses the "sonic attacks" on the U.S. embassy in Cuba.
From Moscow to Havana: Secret Weapons and Diplomats
The “sonic attacks” in Cuba aren’t the first suspected instance of invisible attacks on U.S. diplomats.


Redistributing that energy takes place much more rapidly than do chemical reactions, so that the selectivity envisioned was not possible. But it took a decade or more in the 1970s and 1980s to prove that, and during that time, the failed idea of selectivity settled in alongside the myth that microwaves heat from the inside out. A union of the two ideas seems to be the foundation for a Havana syndrome weapon—one that would cause selective vibrations on the inside of the victim’s skulls, without leaving visible marks or burns on the outside.

If this weapon exists, knowing how it works is critical. The NAS report fails to make this connection. The references are weak, and the committee includes no experts in microwaves and their effects. The committee is made up mostly of experts in medical-related fields. Only two out of 19 seem likely to have any expertise in microwave technology, and it is not their specialty. The section of the report on microwave effects contains about a dozen references spanning 40 years and more. The older references are probably less reliable. The studies include microwave effects on cell cultures, rats, and rhesus monkeys, and only one discusses effects at all similar to Havana syndrome.

In 1961, the neuroscientist Allan H. Frey reported that pulsed microwave radiation can cause people to hear clicking and other sounds without an actual sound being produced. This is the National Academies report’s strongest connection between microwave radiation and neurological damage, and an extended explanation is given in Appendix C. There is ongoing argument, however, as to whether the Frey effect is real—and very little scientific research seems to have been done on it in the 50 years since it was discovered.

With no clear biological connection of microwaves to Havana syndrome, it’s not possible to describe a weapon that would produce that syndrome. We do not know what frequency the supposed microwaves would be or whether they are pulsed or continuous.

And we also do not know what power the source needs to have. But the power required for a microwave oven gives us a benchmark. Microwave ovens, for example, have big power requirements, as a weapon is likely to. Microwave ovens get their power from the house supply, but a portable weapon would need its own electrical supply

Typically, to independently power a microwave oven you would need a 2,200-watt gasoline-powered generator, which would weigh around 50 pounds and measure 11 by 18 by 20 inches. For a hypothetical microwave weapon, the microwave-generating part of the weapon might be another 10 pounds heavier than that and require a similar or larger volume. If batteries were used instead of a gasoline generator, something like 200 laptop computer batteries would be needed to power the weapon.

The range of such a weapon would depend on wavelength, whether the microwave frequencies are pulsed or continuous, and the waves’ collimation, along with the materials between the weapon and its target—a range that would have to be closer to tens of feet than hundreds. A gasoline-powered model could fit in a backpack carried by a strong person. Either a gas-powered or battery-powered model might fit in a van, and definitely in a building. But all of these would be difficult to use unnoticed, or to target individually.

If there is such a weapon that can cause such effects, who is using it and how? Of course, the Russians are the prime suspects. Their military also has an interest in a death ray, and they were the ones who bathed the U.S. Embassy in microwaves during the Cold War. Diplomats and intelligence employees are likely targets. But we have no evidence that the Russians have such a weapon.

Of course, such a weapon would be classified, we are told. Mark Zaid, a lawyer who represents victims, claims that the American government knows more than it is letting on.

That may be, but it would be hard to keep the development of this kind of weapon secret. The military and associated industries are often proud of their innovations. We have heard regularly over the past 40 years of the progress of fitting a laser into an airplane, and the jet suit is popular—even if it only has fuel for about 10 minutes of flight. It’s rare that the government classifies every aspect of research surrounding a classified topic. University research on the interaction of microwaves with the brain would have been sponsored and published, and the National Academies committee would have found many more than its paltry dozen references. Although the central work on laser isotope separation was classified, the ultraviolet spectrum a colleague and I measured passed classification restrictions and was published.

The evidence for microwave effects of the type categorized as Havana syndrome is exceedingly weak. No proponent of the idea has outlined how the weapon would actually work. No evidence has been offered that such a weapon has been developed by any nation. Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence, and no evidence has been offered to support the existence of this mystery weapon.

ON APRIL 10, 1953, ALLEN DULLES, THE NEWLY APPOINTED DIRECTOR OF THE CIA, delivered a speech to a gathering of Princeton alumni. Though the event was mundane, global tensions were running high. The Korean War was coming to an end, and earlier that week, The New York Times had published a startling story asserting that American POWs returning from the country may have been “converted” by “Communist brain-washers.”

Some GI’s were confessing to war crimes, like carrying out germ warfare against the Communists–a charge the U.S. categorically denied. Others were reportedly so brainwashed that they had refused to return to the United States at all. As if that weren’t enough, the U.S. was weeks away from secretly sponsoring the overthrow of a democratically elected leader in Iran.

Dulles had just become the first civilian director of an agency growing more powerful by the day, and the speech provided an early glimpse into his priorities for the CIA. “In the past few years we have become accustomed to hearing much about the battle for men’s minds–the war of ideologies,” he told the attendees. “I wonder, however, whether we clearly perceive the magnitude of the problem, whether we realize how sinister the battle for men’s minds has become in Soviet hands,” he continued. “We might call it, in its new form, ‘brain warfare.’”

Dulles proceeded to describe the “Soviet brain perversion techniques” as effective, but “abhorrent” and “nefarious.” He gestured to the American POWs returning from Korea, shells of the men they once were, parroting the Communist propaganda they had heard cycled for weeks on end. He expressed fears and uncertainty–were they using chemical agents? Hypnosis? Something else entirely? “We in the West,” the CIA Director conceded, “are somewhat handicapped in brain warfare.” This sort of non-consensual experiment, even on one’s enemies, was antithetical to American values, Dulles insisted, as well as antithetical to what should be human values.

Fear of brainwashing and a new breed of “brain warfare” terrified and fascinated the American public throughout the 1950s, spurred both by the words of the CIA and the stories of “brainwashed” G.I.’s returning from China, Korea, and the Soviet Union. Newspaper headlines like “New Evils Seen in Brainwashing” and “Brainwashing vs. Western Psychiatry” offered sensational accounts of new mind-control techniques and technologies that no man could fully resist. The paranoia began to drift into American culture, with books like The Manchurian Candidate and The Naked Lunch playing on themes of unhinged scientists and vast political conspiracies.

The idea of brainwashing also provided many Americans with a compelling, almost comforting, explanation for communism’s swift rise–that Soviets used the tools of brainwashing not just on enemy combatants, but on their own people. Why else would so many countries be embracing such an obviously backward ideology? American freedom of the mind versus Soviet “mind control” became a dividing line as stark as the Iron Curtain.


How did a secret government mind control program inadvertently fuel the use of psychedelic drugs in the 1960s?
MK-ULTRA
Three days after his speech decrying Soviet tactics, Dulles approved the beginning of MK-Ultra, a top-secret CIA program for “covert use of biological and chemical materials.” “American values” made for good rhetoric, but Dulles had far grander plans for the agency’s Cold War agenda.

MK-Ultra’s “mind control” experiments generally centered around behavior modification via electro-shock therapy, hypnosis, polygraphs, radiation, and a variety of drugs, toxins, and chemicals. These experiments relied on a range of test subjects: some who freely volunteered, some who volunteered under coercion, and some who had absolutely no idea they were involved in a sweeping defense research program. From mentally-impaired boys at a state school, to American soldiers, to “sexual psychopaths” at a state hospital, MK-Ultra’s programs often preyed on the most vulnerable members of society. The CIA considered prisoners especially good subjects, as they were willing to give consent in exchange for extra recreation time or commuted sentences.

Whitey Bulger, a former organized crime boss, wrote of his experience as an inmate test subject in MK-Ultra. “Eight convicts in a panic and paranoid state,” Bulger said of the 1957 tests at the Atlanta penitentiary where he was serving time. “Total loss of appetite. Hallucinating. The room would change shape. Hours of paranoia and feeling violent. We experienced horrible periods of living nightmares and even blood coming out of the walls. Guys turning to skeletons in front of me. I saw a camera change into the head of a dog. I felt like I was going insane.”

Bulger claimed he had been injected with LSD. Lysergic acid diethylamide, or acid, had become one of the CIA’s key interests for its “brain warfare” program, as the agency theorized it could be useful in interrogations. In the late 1940s, the CIA received reports that the Soviet Union had engaged in “intensive efforts to produce LSD,” and that the Soviets had attempted to purchase the world’s supply of the chemical. One CIA officer described the agency as “literally terrified” of the Soviets’ LSD program, largely because of the lack of knowledge about the drug in the United States. “[This] was the one material that we had ever been able to locate that really had potential fantastic possibilities if used wrongly,” the officer testified.

With the advent of MK-Ultra, the government’s interest in LSD shifted from a defensive to an offensive orientation. Agency officials noted that LSD could be potentially useful in “[gaining] control of bodies whether they were willing or not.” The CIA envisioned applications that ranged from removing people from Europe in the case of a Soviet attack to enabling assassinations of enemy leaders. On November 18, 1953, a group of ten scientists met at a cabin located deep in the forests of Maryland. After extended discussions, the participants agreed that to truly understand the value of the drug, “an unwitting experiment would be desirable.”


History of the War on Drugs


History of LSD

The CIA remained keenly aware of how the public would react to any discovery of MK-Ultra; even if they believed these programs to be essential to national security, they must remain a tightly guarded secret. How would the CIA possibly explain dosing unassuming Americans with LSD? “Precautions must be taken not only to protect operations from exposure to enemy forces but also to conceal these activities from the American public in general,” wrote the CIA’s Inspector General in 1957. “The knowledge that the Agency is engaging in unethical and illicit activities would have serious repercussions in political and diplomatic circles and would be detrimental to the accomplishment of its mission.”

OPERATION MIDNIGHT CLIMAX
The CIA’s initial experiments with LSD were fairly simple, if shockingly unethical. The agency generally dosed single targets, finding volunteers when they could, sometimes slipping the drug into the drinks of fellow CIA employees. Over time these LSD experiments grew increasingly elaborate. Perhaps the most notorious of these projects was Operation Midnight Climax.

A view of the old CIA building
A view of the old CIA building. (Credit: Ed Clark/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images)
In 1955, on 225 Chestnut Street, San Francisco, the CIA was devoting substantial attention to decorating a bedroom. George White oversaw the interior renovations. Not much of a decorator, White had a storied career in the Federal Bureau of Narcotics. When the CIA moved into drug experiments, bringing White on board became a top priority.

White hung up pictures of French can-can dancers and flowers. He draped lush red bedroom curtains over the windows. He framed a series of Toulouse-Lautrec posters with black silk mats. For a middle-aged drug bureaucrat, each item evoked sex and glamour.

George White wasn’t building a normal bedroom, he was building a trap.

White then hired a Berkeley engineering student to install bugging equipment and a two-way mirror. White sat behind the mirror, martini in hand, and waited for the action to begin. Prostitutes would lure unsuspecting johns to the bedroom, where the men would be dosed with LSD and their actions observed by White from beyond the mirror. As payment for their services the sex workers receive small amounts of cash, as well as a guarantee from White that he’d intercede when the women inevitably had run-ins with law enforcement in the future.

Though the CIA piloted these safe houses as a stage for testing the effects of LSD, White’s interest shifted to another element of his observations: the sex. The San Francisco house became the center of what one writer called “the CIA carnal operations,” as officials began asking new questions about how to work with prostitutes, how they could be trained, and how they would handle state secrets. The agency also analyzed when in the course of a sexual encounter information could best be extracted from a source, eventually concluding that it was immediately after sex.

But perhaps unsurprisingly, much of White’s actions were driven by pure voyeurism: “I toiled wholeheartedly in the vineyards because it was fun, fun, fun,” White later said. “Where else could a red-blooded American boy lie, kill, cheat, steal, rape, and pillage with the sanction and blessing of the All-Highest?"

THE DEMISE OF MK-ULTRA
The CIA’s experiments with LSD persisted until 1963 before coming to a fairly anticlimactic end. In the spring of 1963, John Vance, a member of the CIA Inspector General’s staff, learned about the project’s “surreptitious administration to unwitting nonvoluntary human subjects.” Though the MK-Ultra directors tried to convince the CIA’s independent audit board that the research should continue, the Inspector General insisted the agency follow new research ethics guidelines and bring all the programs on non-consenting volunteers to an end.

In 1977, Senator Edward Kennedy oversaw congressional hearings investigating the effects of MK-Ultra. Congress brought in a roster of ex-CIA employees for questioning, interrogating them about who oversaw these programs, how participants were identified, and if any of these programs had been continued. The Hearings turned over a number of disturbing details, particularly about the 1953 suicide of Dr. Frank Olson, an Army scientist who jumped out of a hotel window several days after unwittingly consuming a drink spiked with LSD. Amid growing criminalization of drug users, and just a few years after President Nixon declared drug abuse as “public enemy number one,” the ironies of the U.S.’s troubling experimentation with drugs appeared in sharp relief.

But throughout the hearings, Congress kept hitting roadblocks: CIA staffers claimed they “couldn’t remember” details about many of the human experimentation projects, or even the number of people involved. The obvious next step would be to consult the records, but that presented a small problem: in 1973, amid mounting inquiries, the director of MK-Ultra told workers “it would be a good idea if [the MK-Ultra] files were destroyed.” Citing vague concerns about the privacy and “embarrassment” of participants, the men who crafted MK-Ultra effectively eradicated the paper record for one of the United States’ most obviously illegal undertakings. A program born in secrecy would hold onto many of its secrets forever.